WinLifeSearch - A Windows port of David Bell's LIFESRC program.

By Jason Summers
9 Jan 2000

Requires Windows 95/98/NT/whatever


WARNING! This program may be buggy, quirky, illogical, and incomplete in 
places. And it isn't very well documented. Nearly all of that is the 
fault of the porter, not the author of LIFESRC.


This is a program to search for oscillators, spaceships, and related objects 
in Conway's Game of Life and related cellular automata. In order to make any 
sense of it, you must be familiar with Life. If not, you can start by 
visiting some of the web sites on the topic, such as 
<http://www.pobox.com/~jason1/life/>.



Brief instructions
------------------

First, get a copy of David Bell's LIFESRC and read through the 
documentation. It would help to be familiar with using LIFESRC, but it 
should not be absolutely necessary.

Run wls.exe. Look through all the menu options. Try a few things.

Keyboard/mouse functions:
  's' or left mouse button = The cell under the mouse is forced ON.
  'a' or right mouse button = The cell under the mouse is forced OFF.
  'x' = Cell is UNCHECKED. Use this to find partial patterns.
  'f' = Cell is frozen (forced to be the same in all generations. Frozen 
        cells don't seem to work too well sometimes. There may be a bug 
        somewhere causing this.
  'c' = Cell is cleared.
  'S' or shift+left mouse button = cell is forced ON in all generations
  'A' or shift+right = cell is forced off in all generations
  'X' = UNCHECKED in all gens
  'C' = cleared in all generations.

You can also select a region of cells using the mouse, then point to the 
selected region and press one of the above keys to set many cells at once. 
This function is a little flaky.

Set up a search by choosing field size, period, symmetry, translation, etc.

Force some cells ON. Often just one in one of the leftmost columns is best. 
Or, use the Search setting "Force an ON cell in column..." to do that.

Start the search. Observe partial results. Run simpler searches for 
practice. Do lots of waiting. Try to get a feel for how well a search is 
going. The "rows" setting will usually determine how fast the search will 
run. Increasing the rows by 1 could slow down the search considerably. 
Increasing columns has usually little or no effect.

The fastest direction to search for spaceships is usually to set the X 
translation to -1 (or -2 as appropriate).


-------------------------------

This port has a few improvements over lifesrc:

- A GUI
- Can reset without restarting the program
- More symmetry options
- More translation options
- Diagonal and "knightship" sort order


And a number of de-improvements and broken things. Off the top of my head:

You cannot change cells after the search has started.

You can only save the state when a search is paused.

Can only save searches, not initial setups. If you want to save a setup, 
start a search first, Pause, use Save state, then when you load it back, do 
a Reset.

There's no way to select and move a region of cells.

There's no way to paste a pattern into the program.


Other notes:
------------

Cells that are the same in all generations will be drawn with a thin border. 
At the lower left is a control that shows which generation being displayed.

If you have a "wheel" mouse, you should be able to switch generations using 
the wheel. You will probably think it seems backwards, though. If you have 
"universal scrolling" turned on, it does not seem to work right and 
sometimes disables keyboard input. I have no idea why. Configure wls.exe as 
an exception to universal scrolling.

You can access the menus while a search is running, but if you change 
settings at that time, it will probably screw up the search. However, it is 
safe to change the Output settings (I think).

You can use Edit|Copy to copy the currently displayed pattern to the 
clipboard. The format is compatible with Life32. This works at any time, 
even while a search is running.

Some symmetry and translation settings will be unavailable unless you set 
rows and columns to the same number.

The Save format is NOT compatible with other versions of lifesrc. I had to 
change it to save the initial setup. It also stores some additional 
settings, and does symmetry and translations a little differently.

The search thread runs at "low" priority, so it shouldn't slow down your 
whole computer to a crawl. However, when it redraws the diagram every X 
generations, that is done at normal priority, so other programs may hesitate 
for an moment.


-------------------------------

The source code is included, but please note...

I initially wanted to do this port primarily by replacing the interface 
functions with Windows version. This turned out to be impractical, and I 
eventually gave up on any pretense of keeping track of the modifications I 
made. The only thing I will mention is the "FASTER" macro in search.c, which 
can be defined to search a few percent faster at the expense of some 
features.

The source contains lots of hacks, bad decisions, redundant code, and dead 
code. It was written by someone who didn't understand LIFESRC very well. I 
recommend against attempting to figure out how this program works in order 
to add significant new features. It really needs a complete overhaul, and it 
would be better just to start over and do it right. 

-------------------------------

You can send feedback to <jason1@pobox.com>. However, I'm not really very 
interested in bug report concerning the interface (unless it's really 
serious), or feature suggestions concerning the interface (unless it's 
really simple). I already know how to fix lots of things, I'm just too lazy 
to do it :-). Suggestions that would increase the search speed, though, 
would be very welcome.

